docs/7-vector-search/10-quantization.mdx, before:

# 🦸‍♂️ Vector quantization

Vector quantization is a technique to reduce the number of bits required to represent a vector. This can help vastly improve vector search performance.

However, before you enable quantization, note the following:

1. Note the current vector search index size. You may do so via the Atlas UI.
2. In the `searchBooks` function, add a couple of lines of code to log the executionStats. Your `searchBooks` function should look like the following:

<details>
<summary>Click to expand</summary>
<div>

```javascript
public async searchBooks(query: string): Promise<Book[]> {
  const vector = await getEmbeddings(query);
  const aggregationPipeline = [
    {
      $vectorSearch: {
        queryVector:  vector,
        path: 'embeddings',
        numCandidates: 100,
        index: 'vectorsearch',
        limit: 10,
      }
    }
  ];
  //log executionStats
  const result = await collections?.books?.aggregate(pipeline).explain();
  console.log(result)
  //-----------------
  const books = await collections?.books?.aggregate(aggregationPipeline).toArray() as Book[];
  return books;
}
```

</div>
</details>

Type a search term e.g. ***basketball*** and observe the logs, in particular, note the `executionTimeMillisEstimate`.

## Enabling quantization

To enable vector auto-quantization on your embeddings, simply set the `quantization` field to one of the supported quantization types (`scalar` or `binary`) in the vector search index definition.

You can edit your vector search index definition to the following:

<details>
<summary>Click to expand</summary>
<div>

```json
{
  "fields": [
    {
      "numDimensions": 1408,
      "path": "embeddings",
      "quantization": "scalar",
      "similarity": "cosine",
      "type": "vector"
    }
    //...
  ]
}
```

</div>
</details>

Now run the same search term and note the `executionTimeMillisEstimate` again. The execution time should be significantly faster.

:::info
Notice the slight increase in the size of the vector search index upon enabling quantization. This is because full-fidelity vectors are also stored on disk for re-scoring and/or exact nearest neighbors (ENN) search.

In the Atlas UI, the entire index size is displayed, which might be larger than the original index size, since Atlas does not show a break down of the data structures within an index that are stored in RAM and on disk.

The Atlas Search metrics however will show a much smaller index that is held in memory when you enable automatic quantization. Refer to our [documentation](https://deploy-preview-6486--cloud-docs.netlify.app/atlas-vector-search/deployment-options/#storage-requirements-for-vectors) to learn more about these considerations.
:::

Commit message:

add some notes on pre-quantized vectors

docs/7-vector-search/10-quantization.mdx, after:

# 🦸‍♂️ Vector quantization

Vector quantization is a technique to reduce the number of bits required to represent a vector. This can help vastly improve vector search performance.

However, before you enable quantization, note the following:

1. Note the current vector search index size. You may do so via the Atlas UI.
2. In the `searchBooks` function, add a couple of lines of code to log the executionStats. Your `searchBooks` function should look like the following:

<details>
<summary>Click to expand</summary>
<div>

```javascript
public async searchBooks(query: string): Promise<Book[]> {
  const vector = await getEmbeddings(query);
  const aggregationPipeline = [
    {
      $vectorSearch: {
        queryVector:  vector,
        path: 'embeddings',
        numCandidates: 100,
        index: 'vectorsearch',
        limit: 10,
      }
    }
  ];
  //log executionStats
  const result = await collections?.books?.aggregate(pipeline).explain();
  console.log(result)
  //-----------------
  const books = await collections?.books?.aggregate(aggregationPipeline).toArray() as Book[];
  return books;
}
```

</div>
</details>

Type a search term e.g. ***basketball*** and observe the logs, in particular, note the `executionTimeMillisEstimate`.

## Enabling quantization

To enable vector auto-quantization on your embeddings, simply set the `quantization` field to one of the supported quantization types (`scalar` or `binary`) in the vector search index definition.

You can edit your vector search index definition to the following:

<details>
<summary>Click to expand</summary>
<div>

```json
{
  "fields": [
    {
      "numDimensions": 1408,
      "path": "embeddings",
      "quantization": "scalar",
      "similarity": "cosine",
      "type": "vector"
    }
    //...
  ]
}
```

</div>
</details>

Now run the same search term and note the `executionTimeMillisEstimate` again. The execution time should be significantly faster.

:::info
Notice the slight increase in the size of the vector search index upon enabling automatic-quantization. This is because full-fidelity vectors are also stored on disk for re-scoring and/or exact nearest neighbors (ENN) search.

In the Atlas UI, the entire index size is displayed, which might be larger than the original index size, since Atlas does not show a break down of the data structures within an index that are stored in RAM and on disk.

The Atlas Search metrics however will show a much smaller index that is held in memory when you enable automatic quantization. Refer to our [documentation](https://deploy-preview-6486--cloud-docs.netlify.app/atlas-vector-search/deployment-options/#storage-requirements-for-vectors) to learn more about these considerations.

If storage and index size is a concern, you may also consider [pre-quantized vectors](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/atlas/atlas-vector-search/vector-quantization/#how-to-ingest-pre-quantized-vectors).
:::
